INFO-GEN(1)                       User Commands                      INFO-GEN(1)

NAME
       info-gen - generate fake US Social Security Numbers, phone numbers, addresses, text with typos, and colors

DESCRIPTION
       info-gen generates fake but realistic US Social Security Numbers (SSNs),
       phone numbers, addresses, text with realistic typos, and colors for testing purposes.
       The tool intelligently uses reserved/invalid number ranges by default to ensure
       generated values do not correspond to real people. For typo generation, it provides
       various typo types based on common typing errors. For color generation, it uses a
       database of color names (recommended to take from https://colornamer.robertcooper.me/
       with over 30,000 color entries) to provide human-readable names for generated colors.

       IMPORTANT: This script MUST be run via the makefile targets. Direct
       invocation of main.py is NOT supported and will cause failures.

       The makefile handles critical functionality including:
         - Creating timestamped output directories (src/outputs/main/YYYY/MM/DD/HH-MM-SS/)
         - Capturing all output to log.txt files via tee
         - Ensuring the script can locate its output directory

       If you run the script directly without the makefile:
         - The script will attempt to find the latest output directory
         - If no output directory exists for today's date, the script will CRASH
           with a FileNotFoundError or AttributeError when scanning for directories
         - If an old output directory exists from a previous run, the script will
           incorrectly use that directory, potentially overwriting old logs or
           causing confusion about which output corresponds to which run
         - No log.txt file will be created, and all output will be lost to the
           terminal with no persistent record

       For SSNs, the tool uses reserved ranges (000, 666, 900-999) for the
       first three digits when not specified. For phone numbers, it uses the
       fictional range XXX-555-0100 to XXX-555-0199 when components are not
       specified.

       Address generation uses intelligent lookup to ensure consistency.
       If a zip code is provided, the city/state will be derived from it
       (if not already specified). If city/state are provided without a
       zip, a matching zip code will be looked up. If a city is provided
       without a state, states with that city will be looked up, and a
       random one of those states will be selected (if none exist, random
       state). Multiple matching zips result in random selection. Unmatched
       values fall back to random generation with warnings.

ARGUMENTS
       --clean-dirty-colors, -cdc
              If set, will clean up the file at `assets/colors-dirty.json` by
              extracting valid color entries (and only the parts needed: name and rgb)
              and writing them to `assets/colors.json`, then abort without running
              further. This is a utility flag used to preprocess color data before
              the main generation functionality.

       TYPE
              Type of identifier to generate. Must be one of:
                ssn     - Generate Social Security Number(s)
                phone   - Generate phone number(s)
                address - Generate US address(es)
                typos   - Generate text with realistic typos
                color   - Generate random color(s) with names and formats
              Default: ssn

       COUNT
              Number of identifiers to generate. Must be a positive integer.
              Default: 1

       --seed, -s SEED
              Optional seed for random number generators. When specified, this integer
              value seeds both the Python random module and the Faker library, producing
              deterministic and reproducible results. Running the tool multiple times
              with the same seed and arguments will generate identical output.

              This is useful for:
                - Testing and debugging (reproducible test data)
                - Generating consistent datasets across multiple runs
                - Creating reproducible examples and demonstrations

              If not specified, a random seed is automatically generated using
              os.urandom() and displayed in the output. This allows you to reproduce
              the same results by copying the displayed seed value and using it in
              subsequent runs with the --seed option.

              The short form -s can be used interchangeably with --seed.

       --seed-byte-size, -sb SIZE
              Number of random bytes to use when automatically generating a seed
              (only applies when --seed is not provided). The bytes are read from
              os.urandom() and converted to an integer seed value.

              Higher values provide more entropy for seed generation:
                - 16 bytes = 128 bits of entropy (default)
                - 32 bytes = 256 bits of entropy
                - 8 bytes = 64 bits of entropy

              This parameter has no effect when --seed is explicitly provided.
              Default: 16

              The short form -sb can be used interchangeably with --seed-byte-size.

       --components, -c COMPONENTS...
              Optional component values for the identifier. This flag specifies
              custom patterns or fixed values for parts of the generated identifier.
              If omitted, random values using reserved ranges are generated.

              Components can be:
                - Fixed values (use digits: "666", "555", "0100")
                - Pattern values (use 'x' or non-digits for random: "xxx", "01xx")
                - Omitted (use "none" or "null" to force random generation)

              For SSN, up to three components are accepted:
                START  - First 3 digits (000-999)
                MID    - Middle 2 digits (00-99)
                END    - Last 4 digits (0000-9999)

              For PHONE, up to three components are accepted:
                AREA    - Area code (200-999)
                CENTRAL - Central office code (200-999)
                LINE    - Line number (0000-9999)

              Components can be specified space-separated or dash-separated.
              Values outside valid ranges are automatically clamped.

              The short form -c can be used interchangeably with --components.
       --building_number BUILDING_NUMBER
              For generating addresses, specify the building/house number.
       --street STREET
              For generating addresses, specify the street name.
       --city CITY
              For generating addresses, specify the city name.
       --state STATE
              For generating addresses, specify the state name or abbreviation. If
              this is not a valid state, a random state will be generated instead.
       --zip ZIP
              For generating addresses, specify the ZIP code. If this is not a valid zip code, a
              random zip code will be generated instead.
       --no-state-abbr
              For generating addresses, output the full state name instead of the abbreviation.
       --no-existing-city
              For generating addresses, instead of picking a city in a resolved state, generate a
              completely random city name.

       --text, -t TEXT
              For generating typos, specify the text to apply typos to. Text should only
              contain keyboard characters and spaces.
              Default: "Example text for typo generation."

       --typos, -ts TYPO_TYPES...
              For generating typos, specify which typo types to apply. Multiple types can be
              specified. Available types:
                let-ins      - Insert random letters
                let-sub      - Substitute letters with random letters
                digit-ins    - Insert random digits
                digit-sub    - Substitute characters with random digits
                char-ins     - Insert random keyboard characters
                char-sub     - Substitute with random keyboard characters
                kb-ins       - Insert characters near the original key on keyboard
                kb-sub       - Substitute with nearby keyboard keys
                kb-ins-as    - Insert characters near the original key (account for shift)
                kb-sub-as    - Substitute with nearby keyboard keys (account for shift)
                trans        - Transpose adjacent characters
                del          - Delete characters
                case         - Change character case (upper/lower)
                word-dup     - Duplicate entire words
                dbl-miss     - Miss double letters (e.g., "letter" -> "leter")
                dbl-ins      - Insert extra double letters (e.g., "letter" -> "lettter")
                filler-ins   - Insert filler words (like, um, uh, etc.)
                homophone    - Replace words with homophones (e.g., "their" -> "there")
              Default: all types

       --typo-weights, -tw WEIGHTS...
              For generating typos, specify the relative weight for each typo type.
              Weights should be positive integers corresponding to the order of types
              specified in --typos. Higher weights make that typo type more likely.
              If not specified, all types have equal weight (1).

       --typo-rate, -tr RATE
              For generating typos, specify the probability (0.0-1.0) of applying a typo
              to each word in the text.
              Default: 0.1

       --typos-per-word, -tpw COUNT
              For generating typos, specify the maximum number of typos to apply per word
              when a word is selected for typo application.
              Default: 1

       --min-r VALUE
              For generating colors, specify the minimum red value (0-255).
              Default: 0

       --max-r VALUE
              For generating colors, specify the maximum red value (0-255).
              Default: 255

       --exact-r, -r VALUE
              For generating colors, specify an exact red value (0-255).
              If specified, overrides min-r and max-r for the red component.

       --min-g VALUE
              For generating colors, specify the minimum green value (0-255).
              Default: 0

       --max-g VALUE
              For generating colors, specify the maximum green value (0-255).
              Default: 255

       --exact-g, -g VALUE
              For generating colors, specify an exact green value (0-255).
              If specified, overrides min-g and max-g for the green component.

       --min-b VALUE
              For generating colors, specify the minimum blue value (0-255).
              Default: 0

       --max-b VALUE
              For generating colors, specify the maximum blue value (0-255).
              Default: 255

       --exact-b, -b VALUE
              For generating colors, specify an exact blue value (0-255).
              If specified, overrides min-b and max-b for the blue component.


PATTERN SYSTEM
       The tool supports a flexible pattern system for components:

       Integer values
              Exact digits are preserved: "666" generates "666"

       Mixed patterns
              Digits are preserved, non-digits become random:
              "6x6" might generate "626", "646", "696", etc.
              "01xx" might generate "0123", "0187", "0145", etc.

       All non-digits
              With no digits, generates completely random value in valid range:
              "xxx" generates any 3-digit number (for SSN start: reserved only)
              "xxxx" generates any 4-digit number

RESERVED RANGES
       SSN Reserved Values (used by default for START component):
              000      - Invalid SSN
              666      - Invalid SSN
              900-999  - Invalid SSN range

       Phone Reserved Range (used by default):
              XXX-555-0100 through XXX-555-0199
              This range is reserved for fictional use in North America.

       Zip Codes:
              The tool uses a database of valid US zip codes for address
              generation and lookup. For random zip codes, all will be 5-digit
              numbers with leading zeros as needed.

WARNINGS
       The tool issues warnings when generated values may correspond to real
       people:

       For SSNs:
              If the START component (first 3 digits) is not in the reserved
              range (000, 666, or 900-999), a warning is displayed.

       For Phone Numbers:
              If CENTRAL is not 555, a warning is displayed.
              If CENTRAL is 555 but LINE is outside 0100-0199, a warning is
              displayed.

       For Addresses:
              If both building_number and street are provided, a warning is
              displayed since this may correspond to a real location.
              If provided city/state/zip values are inconsistent, warnings are
              shown but user-specified values are preserved.

EXAMPLES
       Clean the dirty colors file (utility operation):
              make start ARGS="--clean-dirty-colors"

       Generate one random SSN (uses reserved range):
              make gen-ssn

       Generate 5 random SSNs:
              make gen-ssns ARGS="5"

       Generate SSN with specific first part using --components:
              make gen-ssn ARGS="--components 666"
              make gen-ssn ARGS="-c 666 12 3456"
              make gen-ssn ARGS="--components 666-12-3456"

       Generate multiple SSNs with pattern (6 followed by two random digits):
              make gen-ssns ARGS="10 --components 6xx"
              make gen-ssns ARGS="10 -c 6xx"

       Generate SSN with pattern for middle and end components:
              make gen-ssn ARGS="-c 666 xx xxxx"

       Generate one random phone number (uses 555 reserved range):
              make gen-phone

       Generate 10 random phone numbers:
              make gen-phones ARGS="10"

       Generate phone with specific components:
              make gen-phone ARGS="--components 555 555 0100"
              make gen-phone ARGS="-c 555-555-0100"

       Generate multiple phones with random area code but reserved central/line:
              make gen-phones ARGS="5 --components xxx 555 01xx"
              make gen-phones ARGS="5 -c xxx 555 01xx"

       Generate phone with specific area code, random central and line:
              make gen-phone ARGS="-c 212"

       Generate 100 completely random (but reserved) SSNs:
              make gen-ssns ARGS="100"

       Using the generic start target:
              make start ARGS="ssn 5 --components 666-xx-xxxx"
              make start ARGS="ssn 5 -c 666-xx-xxxx"
              make start ARGS="phone 10 -c xxx-555-01xx"

       Generate a random address:
              make gen-address

       Generate 5 random addresses:
              make gen-addresses ARGS="5"

       Generate address with specific city:
              make gen-address ARGS="--city Boston"

       Generate address with specific state:
              make gen-address ARGS="--state California"
              make gen-address ARGS="--state CA"

       Generate address with specific zip code:
              make gen-address ARGS="--zip 02101"

       Generate address with city and state (zip will be looked up):
              make gen-address ARGS="--city Cambridge --state MA"

       Generate address with all components:
              make gen-address ARGS="--building_number 123 --street 'Main St' --city Boston --state MA --zip 02101"

       Generate 10 addresses in a specific city:
              make gen-addresses ARGS="10 --city 'New York' --state NY"

       Generate address with full state name instead of abbreviation:
              make gen-address ARGS="--state California --no-state-abbr"

       Using the generic start target for addresses:
              make start ARGS="address 5 --city Seattle --state WA"

       Generate text with default typos:
              make gen-typos

       Generate text with custom text:
              make gen-typos ARGS="--text 'The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog'"
              make gen-typos ARGS="-t 'Hello world this is a test'"

       Generate multiple typo variations of the same text:
              make gen-typos-multi ARGS="5 --text 'Testing typo generation'"

       Generate text with specific typo types only:
              make gen-typos ARGS="--text 'Sample text' --typos trans del case"
              make gen-typos ARGS="-t 'Sample text' -ts kb-sub trans"

       Generate text with weighted typo types (keyboard substitution weighted 5x more):
              make gen-typos ARGS="--text 'Sample' --typos kb-sub trans --typo-weights 5 1"

       Generate text with higher typo rate (50% of words get typos):
              make gen-typos ARGS="--text 'Hello world' --typo-rate 0.5"
              make gen-typos ARGS="-t 'Hello world' -tr 0.5"

       Generate text with multiple typos per word:
              make gen-typos ARGS="--text 'Testing' --typos-per-word 3"
              make gen-typos ARGS="-t 'Testing' -tpw 3"

       Using the generic start target for typos:
              make start ARGS="typos 10 --text 'Test string' --typos kb-sub trans del"

       Generate a random color:
              make gen-color

       Generate 5 random colors:
              make gen-colors ARGS="5"

       Generate a color with specific RGB values:
              make gen-color ARGS="--exact-r 255 --exact-g 0 --exact-b 0"
              make gen-color ARGS="-r 255 -g 0 -b 0"

       Generate colors with red values between 200-255:
              make gen-colors ARGS="10 --min-r 200 --max-r 255"

       Generate colors with specific green and random red/blue:
              make gen-color ARGS="--exact-g 128"
              make gen-color ARGS="-g 128"

       Generate multiple colors with constrained RGB ranges:
              make gen-colors ARGS="20 --min-r 100 --max-r 200 --min-g 50 --max-g 150"

       Using the generic start target for colors:
              make start ARGS="color 5 --min-r 128 --max-r 255"

       Generate deterministic results with a seed:
              make gen-ssn ARGS="--seed 42"
              make gen-ssns ARGS="5 --seed 12345"
              make gen-phone ARGS="--seed 999"
              make gen-addresses ARGS="10 --seed 7 --city Boston"
              make gen-typos ARGS="--seed 100 --text 'Testing'"

       Generate same results across multiple runs using the same seed:
              make gen-ssns ARGS="3 --seed 42"
              make gen-ssns ARGS="3 --seed 42"  # Will produce identical output

       Reproduce results from a previous run:
              # First run (no seed specified, auto-generated seed is displayed)
              make gen-ssn
              # Output shows: "No seed provided. Generated random seed 12345678... from 16 bytes of entropy."
              # Later run (use the displayed seed to get the same result)
              make gen-ssn ARGS="--seed 12345678..."

       Use more entropy for automatic seed generation:
              make gen-ssns ARGS="5 --seed-byte-size 32"  # 256 bits of entropy
              make gen-addresses ARGS="10 -sb 8"  # 64 bits of entropy

OUTPUT FORMAT
       SSN Format:
              XXX-XX-XXXX
              Example: 666-12-3456

       Phone Format:
              (XXX) XXX-XXXX
              Example: (555) 555-0100

       Address Format:
              BUILDING_NUMBER STREET, CITY STATE, ZIP
              Example: 742 Evergreen Terrace, Springfield IL, 62701
              With --no-state-abbr: 742 Evergreen Terrace, Springfield Illinois, 62701

       Typos Format:
              Modified text string with typos applied
              Example input: "The quick brown fox"
              Example output: "Teh qwick browwn foz"

       Color Format:
              COLOR_NAME - rgb(R, G, B), hex: #RRGGBB, hsl(H, S%, L%)
              Example: Crimson Red - rgb(220, 20, 60), hex: #dc143c, hsl(348.00, 83.33%, 47.06%)

       Output includes:
              - Seed information (either "Using provided seed: X" or "No seed provided. Generated random seed X from Y bytes of entropy.")
              - Transformation messages (when patterns are used for SSN/phone)
              - Clamping messages (when values are out of range for SSN/phone)
              - Location lookup messages (for addresses with --city/--state/--zip)
              - Typo generation messages
              - Warnings (when values may be real)
              - Final results under "------- Output -------" header

LOGGING
       All output is automatically logged to a timestamped directory:
              src/outputs/main/YYYY/MM/DD/HH-MM-SS/log.txt

       This includes stdout, stderr, transformation messages, and warnings.
       The makefile automatically creates this directory structure and uses
       tee to display output to the console while simultaneously writing to
       the log file.

       CRITICAL: This logging functionality is ONLY available when running
       via the makefile. Direct script invocation will either:
         1. CRASH if no output directory exists for the current date
         2. Use an incorrect/stale output directory from a previous run
         3. Fail to create log.txt, losing all output permanently

FILES
       src/main.py
              Main script containing generation logic

       src/typo/main.py
              Typo generator classes and logic

       src/typo/vars.py
              Character sets and variables used for typo generation

       src/typo/vars.py
              Character sets and variables used for typo generation

       src/utils/output.py
              Utility functions for output directory management

       src/utils/location.py
              Functions for US location lookups (cities, states, zip codes)

       src/utils/math.py
              Utility functions for math operations (e.g., clamping, random selection)

       src/utils/component.py
              Functions for parsing and applying component patterns

       src/utils/colors/main.py
              Color conversion utilities and color name database management

       src/utils/colors/types.py
              Color data types and classes
       
       src/typo_test.py
              Test script for typo generation functionality
       
       src/colors_test.py
              Test script for color generation functionality
       
       src/location_test.py
              Test script for location lookup functionality

       generators/phone.py
              Functions for generating phone numbers
       
       generators/ssn.py
              Functions for generating Social Security Numbers

       generators/address/main.py
              Functions for generating US addresses

       generators/address/types.py
              Address data types and classes
       
       generators/typos/main.py
              Functions for generating text with typos

       generators/typos/types.py
              Typo data types and classes

       generators/colors/main.py
              Functions for generating random colors and finding nearest color names
       
       generators/colors/types.py
              Color data types and classes

       makefile
              Convenience targets for running the generator

       make-man.txt
              Documentation for makefile targets

       src/man.txt
              This manual page

TYPO GENERATION SYSTEM
       The typo generation system simulates realistic typing errors that humans make.
       Each typo type represents a different kind of mistake:

       Character-level typos:
              - Insertions add extra characters (let-ins, digit-ins, char-ins, kb-ins, kb-ins-as)
              - Substitutions replace characters (let-sub, digit-sub, char-sub, kb-sub, kb-sub-as)
              - Deletions remove characters (del)
              - Transpositions swap adjacent characters (trans)
              - Case changes alter capitalization (case)

       Keyboard-proximity typos:
              - kb-ins, kb-sub: Use the physical keyboard layout to insert/substitute nearby keys
              - kb-ins-as, kb-sub-as: Account for shift key state when choosing nearby keys

       Word-level typos:
              - word-dup: Repeats words (e.g., "the the cat")
              - dbl-miss: Misses doubled letters (e.g., "book" -> "bok")
              - dbl-ins: Adds extra doubled letters (e.g., "book" -> "boook")
              - filler-ins: Inserts filler words like "um", "uh", "like"
              - homophone: Replaces words with sound-alike alternatives (e.g., "their" -> "there")

       Typo Distribution:
              By default, all typo types have equal probability. Use --typo-weights to
              adjust the likelihood of each type. For example, to make keyboard substitution
              errors 3 times more likely than transpositions:
              --typos kb-sub trans --typo-weights 3 1

       Typo Rate:
              The --typo-rate parameter controls what percentage of words receive typos.
              A rate of 0.1 means roughly 10% of words will have typos applied.
              A rate of 0.5 means roughly 50% of words will have typos applied.

       Typos Per Word:
              When a word is selected for typo application, --typos-per-word controls
              the maximum number of typos that can be applied to that single word.
              The actual number is randomly chosen between 1 and this maximum.

COLOR GENERATION SYSTEM
       The color generation system creates random colors with multiple representations
       and human-readable names. Each generated color includes:

       Color Formats:
              - RGB (Red, Green, Blue): Values from 0-255 for each channel
              - Hexadecimal: Six-digit hex code (e.g., #FF5733)
              - HSL (Hue, Saturation, Lightness): Alternative color representation
                useful for design work

       Color Naming:
              The system finds the nearest
              matching color name by calculating the Euclidean distance in RGB
              color space.

              The color database is recommended to originate from the Color Namer project
              (https://github.com/robertcoopercode/color-namer) and can be
              obtained by querying https://api.color.pizza/v1/?list=default

              Due to the large size of the color database files, they are not
              included in the repository. It will be fetched automatically if
              "assets/colors-dirty.json" is not present when cleaning colors.

              This means you can create your own color database file if desired, as long as it follows
              the format:

              {
                     "colors": [
                            {
                                   "name": "Color Name",
                                   "rgb": {"r": 255, "g": 0, "b": 0}
                            },
                            ...
                     ]
              }
              
              The tool will extract the "name" and "rgb" fields from each entry for its internal use.

       RGB Constraints:
              You can constrain the random color generation by specifying minimum
              and maximum values for each RGB channel, or exact values to fix
              specific channels while randomizing others. This is useful for:
              - Generating colors within a specific palette
              - Creating variations of a base color
              - Ensuring colors meet specific brightness or saturation requirements

       Example Use Cases:
              - Generate shades of red: --min-r 200 --max-r 255 --max-g 100 --max-b 100
              - Generate grayscale colors: Use equal min/max values for all channels
              - Generate pastel colors: Use --min-r 200 --min-g 200 --min-b 200
              - Fix one channel: --exact-r 255 (red at maximum, green/blue random)

EXIT STATUS
       0      Success

       1      Error occurred:
              - Invalid type specified (not 'ssn', 'phone', 'address', 'typos', or 'color')
              - Invalid count (not a positive integer)
              - Invalid text format (contains non-keyboard characters for typos)
              - Invalid RGB value (not an integer between 0 and 255 for colors)
              - No "assets/colors.json" file found when generating colors

NOTES
       Required Usage:
              ALWAYS use the makefile targets (make gen-ssn, make gen-ssns,
              make gen-phone, make gen-phones, make gen-typos, make gen-typos-multi,
              or make start). Direct invocation of the Python script is NOT supported.

              Consequences of direct invocation:
                - Script will crash if src/outputs/main/YYYY/MM/DD/ doesn't exist
                - Script will use wrong directory if old outputs exist
                - No log file will be created, output lost forever
                - The get_latest_outputs_dir() function in utils/output.py expects the
                  makefile to have already created the timestamped directory

              The script's design assumes the makefile has run first to create
              the proper directory structure. This is intentional - the makefile
              is not optional tooling, it is a required part of the execution
              environment.

       Randomness:
              The tool uses Python's random module and the Faker library for
              random generation. For cryptographically secure random numbers,
              the implementation would need modification.

              Seed Behavior:
              - If --seed is provided: Uses that exact seed value
              - If --seed is not provided: Automatically generates a random seed
                using os.urandom() and displays it in the output
              - Either way, the seed is displayed so results can be reproduced

              Use the --seed option to make output deterministic and reproducible.
              The same seed value will always produce the same sequence of outputs.
              Even when not providing a seed explicitly, the auto-generated seed
              is shown in the output, allowing you to reproduce the same results
              later by copying that seed value.

       Validation:
              Values are automatically clamped to valid ranges. For example,
              SSN start values >999 are clamped to 999.

       Real vs. Fake:
              By default, the tool generates values that are guaranteed
              or highly likely to be invalid/fictional. Override
              components at your own risk and heed the warnings.

       Dependencies:
              The makefile uses 'uv' for Python environment management. Install
              it with 'make uv-install' if not already available. 'uv' itself
              handles all Python dependencies via the 'pyproject.toml' file.

SEE ALSO
       make-man.txt - Documentation for makefile targets
       README.md - Project overview and setup instructions

INFO-GEN                         January 2026                      INFO-GEN(1)
